# 5. Hands-On Prompt Practice

This section bridges theory and practice, offering guided scenarios to
help you experiment with prompts and develop practical skills. Each
example tackles real-world problems, from creative content to technical
tasks, while reinforcing key concepts like the **Role ÔåÆ Context ÔåÆ Task ÔåÆ
Examples ÔåÆ Constraints** structure. By engaging with these scenarios,
you'll learn how to craft effective prompts, refine outputs, and make
GPT a valuable collaborator in solving everyday challenges.

### Scenario 1: Sustainable Packaging Blog Blueprint

**Why**

A small business owner wants to highlight the benefits of their
sustainable packaging in a blog post. Effective content can attract
environmentally conscious customers, boost engagement, and enhance brand
trust while promoting eco-friendly values.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Generate three taglines for a blog titled *"Top 5 Reasons to Switch
    to Sustainable Packaging."*

2.  Create an introductory paragraph explaining the benefits of
    sustainable packaging for businesses and the environment.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a creative marketing copywriter."\
    *Context*: "The business sells eco-friendly packaging solutions."\
    *Task*: "Generate three engaging taglines and a 100-word
    introduction for a blog post about sustainable packaging benefits."\
    *Examples*: \"Eco-friendly today, sustainable tomorrow.\"\
    *Constraints*: "Taglines should be under 10 words. The introduction
    must be professional yet relatable."

-   **Expected Outcome**:

    -   **Taglines**: Creative, concise, and aligned with eco-friendly
        themes.

    -   **Introduction**: A professional, engaging paragraph that
        highlights key benefits like environmental impact, brand
        reputation, and customer appeal.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Did the taglines capture the brand's eco-friendly values?

    2.  Was the introduction clear, engaging, and on-message?

    3.  How could the tone be adjusted for a different audience?

**Pro Tip**:\
After generating the content, ask GPT to suggest subheadings for the
blog post and experiment with alternate tones like humorous or formal.

### Scenario 2: Machine Learning Simplified for Students

**Why**

Understanding complex concepts like machine learning can be challenging
for high school students. Simplifying these ideas with relatable
analogies fosters curiosity and engagement.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Explain machine learning to a 15-year-old student using simple
    language and analogies.

2.  Keep the explanation under 100 words.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a high school teacher simplifying technical
    concepts."\
    *Context*: "Your audience is a group of 15-year-old students."\
    *Task*: "Explain machine learning in under 100 words using analogies
    from sports or art."\
    *Constraints*: "Avoid technical jargon. Focus on relatable
    examples."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A concise explanation that uses analogies to make machine learning
    accessible and engaging.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Did the explanation use analogies effectively?

    2.  How could it be refined to connect more with a younger audience?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Experiment with analogies from different domains, such as cooking or
    video games, to see how they influence understanding.

### Scenario 3: Wi-Fi Troubleshooting Made Easy

**Why**

Wi-Fi issues are frustrating for non-technical users. A simple
troubleshooting guide can help resolve problems quickly and efficiently.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Generate a troubleshooting guide for common Wi-Fi issues.

2.  Include solutions for slow speeds, dropped connections, and hardware
    failures.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a technical support expert creating a
    troubleshooting guide."\
    *Context*: "Your audience is non-technical home users."\
    *Task*: "List step-by-step solutions for common Wi-Fi issues like
    slow speeds and dropped connections."\
    *Constraints*: "Keep each step under 20 words. Avoid technical
    jargon."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A clear troubleshooting guide that addresses common Wi-Fi issues in
    an accessible way.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Were the steps actionable and easy to follow?

    2.  How could the guide be adapted for a technical audience?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    After creating the guide, ask GPT to reformat it into a checklist or
    a script for customer support.

### Scenario 4: Breaking Down Technical Jargon for Business Teams

**Why**

Technical jargon can exclude non-technical stakeholders. Simplifying
complex documents ensures everyone can contribute meaningfully.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Summarise a 500-word technical document into five bullet points.

2.  Focus on actionable insights for non-technical business teams.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a technical communicator translating complex ideas
    into accessible summaries."\
    *Context*: "The audience is a non-technical business team."\
    *Task*: "Summarise this document in five bullet points, each under
    15 words."\
    *Constraints*: "Focus on actionable insights and avoid technical
    jargon."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A concise, clear summary highlighting key insights and actionable
    steps.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Did the summary cover the document's essential points?

    2.  How could the bullet points be clearer or more concise?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    After creating the summary, ask GPT to rephrase it in a more formal
    or conversational tone to suit different audiences.

### Scenario 5: Crafting a Food Delivery API Schema

**Why**

A well-designed API schema ensures scalability and ease of maintenance
for complex applications. Developers need to follow best practices to
build reliable systems.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Draft an API schema for a food delivery app.

2.  Include endpoints for orders, deliveries, and account management.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are an API designer creating a schema for a food
    delivery app."\
    *Context*: "The app should handle high traffic and support future
    feature expansions."\
    *Task*: "Design an API schema with endpoints for orders, deliveries,
    and account management."\
    *Constraints*: "Follow RESTful conventions. Include sample
    request/response formats."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A well-documented API schema with clear endpoints and structured
    responses.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Were the endpoints comprehensive and logically structured?

    2.  Did the schema follow RESTful conventions?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Ask GPT to add endpoints for promotional offers or customer feedback
    and evaluate their relevance.

### Scenario 6: GDPR Compliance Report in a Flash

**Why**

GDPR compliance is critical for web applications. Automating report
drafting saves time and ensures thoroughness.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Draft a GDPR compliance report for a web application.

2.  Focus on data retention and security policies.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a compliance officer drafting a GDPR compliance
    report."\
    *Context*: "The report should focus on data handling and security
    measures."\
    *Task*: "Draft a compliance report summarising data retention and
    security policies for GDPR compliance."\
    *Constraints*: "Keep the report concise and professional."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A structured compliance report covering key GDPR requirements like
    data retention and security.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Did the report include all critical GDPR elements?

    2.  How could the information be tailored for specific stakeholders?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Ask GPT to identify potential gaps in the draft and suggest
    additional sections.

### Scenario 7: Uncovering Edge Cases in Mobile Shopping

**Why**

Exploratory testing is essential for finding hidden issues in complex
systems. Identifying edge cases in a mobile shopping app ensures a
seamless user experience under various conditions.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Suggest 10 exploratory testing scenarios for a mobile shopping cart
    feature.

2.  Include edge cases like network instability, large orders, and
    session timeouts.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a Quality Engineer brainstorming exploratory
    testing scenarios."\
    *Context*: "The mobile shopping app must handle high traffic, varied
    device types, and unreliable networks."\
    *Task*: "Suggest 10 edge cases for testing a shopping cart feature
    under different conditions."\
    *Examples*: \"User adds an item to the cart, but the network
    disconnects before checkout.\"\
    *Constraints*: "Ensure scenarios cover usability, performance, and
    security."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A list of creative and actionable edge cases for exploratory
    testing.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Were the edge cases comprehensive and relevant to potential user
        issues?

    2.  How could additional conditions or constraints improve the
        scenarios?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    After generating the list, ask GPT to rank the scenarios by
    likelihood and impact to help prioritise testing efforts.

### Scenario 8: Decoding System Logs for Root Causes

**Why**

System logs contain valuable insights into recurring issues. Analysing
these logs helps identify root causes, enabling faster issue resolution
and improved system reliability.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Analyse a sample system log to identify patterns or recurring
    errors.

2.  Suggest possible causes and fixes for the detected issues.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a system analyst reviewing application logs for
    root causes."\
    *Context*: "The logs are from a high-traffic e-commerce site
    experiencing intermittent outages."\
    *Task*: "Summarise recurring errors in this system log and suggest
    potential fixes."\
    *Examples*: \"HTTP 500 errors appear frequently during peak traffic
    hours.\"\
    *Constraints*: "Focus on patterns related to network requests and
    database performance."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A concise summary of recurring errors with actionable
    recommendations for fixes.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Did GPT correctly identify recurring patterns in the logs?

    2.  How useful and actionable were the suggested fixes?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Provide GPT with logs in different formats (e.g., JSON or plain
    text) and compare its ability to analyse each format effectively.

### Scenario 9: Optimising Playwright Tests in TypeScript

**Why**

Code reviews improve quality by identifying inefficiencies and errors.
Reviewing Playwright tests written in TypeScript ensures effective and
maintainable end-to-end testing.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Review a block of TypeScript code for Playwright tests.

2.  Suggest improvements for readability, efficiency, and robustness.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a code reviewer optimising TypeScript tests for
    Playwright."\
    *Context*: "The tests cover end-to-end scenarios for a login feature
    on a web app."\
    *Task*: "Review this TypeScript code and suggest improvements for
    readability, efficiency, and test coverage."\
    *Examples*: Sample code snippet for review:

-   await page.fill(\'input\[name=\"username\"\]\', \'testuser\');

-   await page.fill(\'input\[name=\"password\"\]\', \'password123\');

-   await page.click(\'button\[type=\"submit\"\]\');

*Constraints*: "Focus on simplifying logic and ensuring reliable test
execution."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    Detailed suggestions for improving code readability, performance,
    and maintainability.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Were the suggested improvements aligned with Playwright best
        practices?

    2.  How could the review be refined to enhance test coverage?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Ask GPT to suggest additional test cases, such as security or
    edge-case scenarios, to improve overall robustness.

### Scenario 10: Spotting and Fixing Bias in AI Outputs

**Why**

Bias in AI outputs can perpetuate stereotypes or exclude diverse
perspectives. Identifying and addressing bias ensures fairness and
inclusivity in generated content.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Analyse a paragraph for implicit bias in language or tone.

2.  Suggest revisions to improve inclusivity and balance.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are an AI ethics reviewer evaluating outputs for
    bias."\
    *Context*: "The text is a workplace diversity statement intended for
    a public audience."\
    *Task*: "Identify any implicit bias in this text and rewrite it to
    be more inclusive and balanced."\
    *Examples*:\
    Original: "Women bring empathy to teams."\
    Revised: "Empathy is a valuable skill that many team members bring,
    regardless of gender."\
    *Constraints*: "Focus on avoiding stereotypes and ensuring a
    neutral, respectful tone."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A revised paragraph free of bias, with an explanation of the changes
    made.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  How effectively did GPT identify and address implicit bias?

    2.  What additional guidance could improve the revisions?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Experiment by asking GPT to rewrite the text for different
    audiences, such as executives or community leaders, and evaluate
    inclusivity across versions.

### Scenario 11: Fact-Checking AI: Detecting Hallucinations

**Why**

AI can generate inaccurate or fabricated information. Fact-checking
GPT's outputs ensures reliability, particularly for critical or factual
content.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Summarise a historical event, such as the Treaty of Waitangi.

2.  Verify the accuracy of the response using a reliable source.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a historian fact-checking AI-generated content for
    accuracy."\
    *Context*: "The summary should focus on key events and avoid
    controversial interpretations."\
    *Task*: "Summarise the Treaty of Waitangi in 150 words using widely
    accepted historical facts. Flag any uncertainties."\
    *Examples*: Key points include the signing date, primary parties
    involved, and key treaty terms.\
    *Constraints*: "Avoid subjective language and cite sources where
    possible."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    An accurate and concise summary with flagged uncertainties for
    further review.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  Were there inaccuracies or fabrications in GPT's summary?

    2.  How could the prompt be refined to reduce errors?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Test GPT's reliability further by providing ambiguous or
    controversial topics and refining prompts for clarity.

### Scenario 12: Maintaining Coherence in Long GPT Sessions

**Why**

In long conversations, GPT can lose context, leading to disjointed
outputs. Managing context ensures continuity and coherence for complex
tasks.

**What**

Learn how to use GPT to:

1.  Simulate a project discussion over multiple prompts.

2.  Summarise key points every five prompts to maintain context and
    focus.

**How**

-   **Hint**:\
    *Role*: "You are a project manager leading a discussion about a new
    product launch."\
    *Context*: "The discussion spans marketing, development, and budget
    considerations."\
    *Task*: "Summarise key points from the discussion every five prompts
    to ensure continuity."\
    *Examples*:\
    Summary after five prompts: "Key points discussed include budget
    constraints, marketing timelines, and MVP features."\
    *Constraints*: "Limit summaries to 50 words and maintain a clear
    focus on priorities."

-   **Expected Outcome**:\
    A cohesive set of summaries that track progress and maintain focus
    across a long session.

-   **Reflection Questions**:

    1.  How effectively did GPT retain and summarise context?

    2.  What adjustments could improve coherence in longer discussions?

-   **Pro Tip**:\
    Start a new session, reintroduce summaries, and compare how well GPT
    resumes the discussion for continuity.